# Installing an Integrated Development Environment (IDE)

> This section was written in conjunction with ChatGPT.

n Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is a piece of software designed to make it easy to develop, build, and debug your programs.

A typical modern IDE will include:

Some way to easily load and save your code files.
A code editor that has programming-friendly features, such as line numbering, syntax highlighting, integrated help, name completion, and automatic source code formatting.
A basic build system that will allow you to compile and link your program into an executable, and then run it.
An integrated debugger to make it easier to find and fix software defects.
Some way to install plugins so you can modify the IDE or add capabilities such as version control.
Some C++ IDEs will install and configure a C++ compiler and linker for you. Others will allow you to plug in a compiler and linker of your choice (installed separately).

And while you could do all of these things separately, it’s much easier to just install an IDE and be able to do all of these things from a single interface.

So let’s install one!

Choosing an IDE

The obvious next question is, “which one?”. Many IDEs are free (in price), and you can install multiple IDEs if you wish to try more than one. We’ll recommend a few of our favorites below.

If you have some other IDE in mind, that’s fine too. The concepts we show you in these tutorials should generally work for any decent modern IDE. However, various IDEs use different names, layouts, key mappings, etc… so you may have to do a bit of searching in your IDE to find the equivalent functionality.

Tip

To get the most value out of this site, we recommend installing an IDE that comes with a compiler that supports at least C++17.

If you’re restricted to using a compiler that only supports C++14 (due to educational or business constraints), many of the lessons and examples will still work. However, if you encounter a lesson that uses capabilities from C++17 (or newer) and you’re using an older language compiler, you’ll have to skip it or translate it to your version, which may or may not be easy.

You should not be using any compiler that does not support at least C++11 (which is typically considered the modern minimum spec for C++).

We recommend installing the newest version of a compiler. If you can’t use the newest version, these are the absolute minimum compiler versions with C++17 support:

GCC/G++ 7
Clang++ 8
Visual Studio 2017 15.7
Visual Studio (for Windows)

If you are developing on a Windows 10 or 11 machine, then we strongly recommend downloading Visual Studio 2022 Community.

Once you run the installer, you’ll eventually come to a screen that asks you what workload you’d like to install. Choose Desktop development with C++. If you do not do this, then C++ capabilities will not be available.

The default options selected on the right side of the screen should be fine, but please ensure that the Windows 11 SDK (or Windows 10 SDK if that is the only one available) is selected. Windows 11 SDK apps can run on Windows 10.

Visual Studio Workload
If disk space and/or download size are a challenge, then Microsoft still offers Visual Studio Express 2017 for Windows Desktop, which you can find towards the bottom of the page. Microsoft is no longer supporting this product and it doesn’t have many of the newer C++ language capabilities, so we only suggest it for users who can not install Visual Studio Community.

Code::Blocks (for Linux or Windows)

If you are developing on Linux (or you are developing on Windows but want to write programs that you can easily port to Linux), we recommend Code::Blocks. Code::Blocks is a free, open source, cross-platform IDE that will run on both Linux and Windows.

For Windows users

Make sure to get the version of Code::Blocks that has MinGW bundled (it should be the one whose filename ends in mingw-setup.exe). This will install MinGW, which includes a Windows port of the GCC C++ compiler:

Code::Blocks MinGW Windows download
Code::Blocks 20.03 ships with an outdated version of MinGW that only supports C++17 (currently one version back from the latest version of C++). If you want to use the latest version of C++ (C++20), you will need to update MinGW. To do so, follow this procedure:

Install Code::Blocks as per the above.
Close Code::Blocks if it is open.
Open Windows File Explorer (Keyboard shortcut Win-E).
Navigate to your Code::Blocks install directory (probably C:\Program Files (x86)\CodeBlocks).
Rename the “MinGW” directory to “MinGW.bak” (in case something goes wrong).
Open a browser and navigate to https://winlibs.com/.
Download an updated version of MinGW-w64. You probably want the one under Release Versions -> UCRT Runtime -> LATEST -> Win64 -> without LLVM/Clang/LLD/LLDB -> Zip archive.
Extract the “mingw64” folder to your Code::blocks install directory.
Rename “mingw64” to “MinGW”.
Once you have confirmed the updated compiler works, you can delete the old folder (“MinGW.bak”).

For Linux users

Some Linux installations may be missing dependencies needed to run or compile programs with Code::Blocks.

Debian-based Linux users (such as those on Mint or Ubuntu) may need to install the build-essential package. To do so from the terminal command line, type: sudo apt-get install build-essential.

Arch Linux users may need to install the base-devel package.

Users on other Linux variants will need to determine what their equivalent package manager and packages are.

When you launch Code::Blocks for the first time, you may get a Compilers auto-detection dialog. If you do, make sure GNU GCC Compiler is set as the default compiler and then select the OK button.

Compilers Auto Detection dialog
Q: What do I do if I get a "Can’t find compiler executable in your configured search paths for GNU GCC Compiler" error?

Try the following:

If you’re on Windows, make sure you’ve downloaded the version of Code::Blocks WITH MinGW. It’s the one with “mingw” in the name.
Try going to settings, compiler, and choose “reset to defaults”.
Try going to settings, compiler, toolchain executables tab, and make sure “Compiler’s installation directory” is set to the MinGW directory (e.g. C:\Program Files (x86)\CodeBlocks\MinGW).
Try doing a full uninstall, then reinstall.
Try a different compiler.
Visual Studio Code (for experienced Linux, macOS, or Windows users)

Visual Studio Code (also called “VS Code”, not to be confused with the similarly named “Visual Studio Community”) is a code editor that is a popular choice with experienced developers because it is fast, flexible, open source, works for multiple programming languages, and is available for many different platforms.

The downside is that VS Code is much harder to configure correctly than other choices on this list (and on Windows, harder to install as well). Before proceeding, we recommend reading through the installation and configuration documents linked below to ensure you understand and are comfortable with the steps involved.

Warning

This tutorial series does not have complete instructions for VS Code.

Visual Studio Code is not a good option for C++ beginners, and readers have reported many different challenges getting Visual Studio Code installed and configured correctly for C++.

Please do not choose this option unless you are already familiar with Visual Studio Code from prior use, or have experience debugging configuration issues.

We cannot provide installation or configuration support for Visual Studio Code on this site.

A tip o’ the hat to user glibg10b for providing an initial draft of VS Code instructions across multiple articles.

For Linux users

VS Code should be downloaded using your distribution’s package manager. The VS Code instructions for linux cover how to do this for various Linux distributions.

Once VS Code is installed, follow the instructions on how to configure C++ for linux.

For Mac users

The VS Code instructions for Mac detail how to install and setup VS Code for macOS.

Once VS Code is installed, follow the instructions on how to configure C++ for Mac.

For Windows users

The VS Code instructions for Windows detail how to install and setup VS Code for Windows.

Once VS Code is installed, follow the instructions on how to configure C++ for Windows.

Other macOS IDEs

Other popular Mac choices include Xcode (if it is available to you) and the Eclipse code editor. Eclipse is not set up to use C++ by default, and you will need to install the optional C++ components.

Although Visual Studio for Mac has been released, it does not support C++, and Microsoft has announced they are sunsetting the product.

Other compilers or platforms

Q: Can I use a web-based compiler?

Yes, for some things. While your IDE is downloading (or if you’re not sure you want to commit to installing one yet), you can continue this tutorial using a web-based compiler. We recommend one of the following:

TutorialsPoint
Wandbox (can choose different versions of GCC or Clang)
Godbolt (can see assembly)
Web-based compilers are fine for dabbling and simple exercises. However, they are generally quite limited in functionality -- many won’t allow you to create multiple files or effectively debug your programs, and most don’t support interactive input. You’ll want to migrate to a full IDE when you can.

Q: Can I use a command-line compiler (e.g. g++ on Linux)?

Yes, but we don’t recommend it for beginners. You’ll need to find your own editor and look up how to use it elsewhere. Learning to use a command line debugger is not as easy as an integrated debugger, and will make debugging your programs more difficult.

Q: Can I use other code editors or IDEs, such as Eclipse, Sublime, or Notepad++?

Yes, but we don’t recommend it for beginners. There are many great code editors and IDEs that can be configured to support a wide variety of languages, and allow you to mix and match plugins to customize your experience however you like. However, many of these editors and IDEs require additional configuration to compile C++ programs, and there’s a lot that can go wrong during that process. For beginners, we recommend something that works out of the box, so you can spend more time learning to code and less time trying to figure out why your code editor isn’t working properly with your compiler or debugger.

IDEs to avoid

You should avoid the following IDEs altogether because they do not support at least C++11, do not support C++ at all, or are no longer actively supported or maintained:

Borland Turbo C++ -- does not support C++11
Visual Studio for Mac -- does not support C++
Dev C++ -- not actively supported
There is no good reason to use an outdated or unsupported compiler when lightweight, free alternatives that support modern C++ exist.

When things go wrong (a.k.a. when IDE stands for “I don’t even…”)

IDE installations seem to cause their fair share of problems. Installation might fail outright (or installation might work but the IDE will have problems when you try to use it due to a configuration issue). If you encounter such issues, try uninstalling the IDE (assuming it installed in the first place), reboot your machine, disable your antivirus or anti-malware temporarily, and try the installation again.

If you’re still encountering issues at this point, you have two options. The easier option is to try a different IDE. The other option is to fix the problem. Unfortunately, the causes of installation and configuration errors are varied and specific to the IDE software itself, and we’re unable to effectively advise on how to resolve such issues. In this case, we recommend copying the error message or problem you are having into your favorite search engine (such as Google or Duck Duck Go) and trying to find a forum post elsewhere from some poor soul who has inevitably encountered the same issue. Often there will be suggestions on things you can try to remedy the issue.

Moving on

Once your IDE is installed (which can be one of the hardest steps if things don’t go as expected), or if you’re temporarily proceeding with a web-based compiler, you are ready to write your first program!

# Visual Studio Code on Linux
Installation
See the Download Visual Studio Code page for a complete list of available installation options.

By downloading and using Visual Studio Code, you agree to the license terms and privacy statement.

Debian and Ubuntu based distributions
The easiest way to install Visual Studio Code for Debian/Ubuntu based distributions is to download and install the .deb package (64-bit), either through the graphical software center if it's available, or through the command line with:

sudo apt install ./<file>.deb

# If you're on an older Linux distribution, you will need to run this instead:
# sudo dpkg -i <file>.deb
# sudo apt-get install -f # Install dependencies
Copy
Note that other binaries are also available on the VS Code download page.

Installing the .deb package will prompt to install the apt repository and signing key to enable auto-updating using the system's package manager. To automatically install the apt repository and signing key, such as on a non-interactive terminal, run the following command first:

echo "code code/add-microsoft-repo boolean true" | sudo debconf-set-selections
Copy
The apt repository and key can also be installed manually with the following script:

sudo apt-get install wget gpg
wget -qO- https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | gpg --dearmor > packages.microsoft.gpg
sudo install -D -o root -g root -m 644 packages.microsoft.gpg /etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg
echo "deb [arch=amd64,arm64,armhf signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg] https://packages.microsoft.com/repos/code stable main" |sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list > /dev/null
rm -f packages.microsoft.gpg
Copy
Then update the package cache and install the package using:

sudo apt install apt-transport-https
sudo apt update
sudo apt install code # or code-insiders
Copy
RHEL, Fedora, and CentOS based distributions
We currently ship the stable 64-bit VS Code in a yum repository, the following script will install the key and repository:

sudo rpm --import https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc
echo -e "[code]\nname=Visual Studio Code\nbaseurl=https://packages.microsoft.com/yumrepos/vscode\nenabled=1\ngpgcheck=1\ngpgkey=https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc" | sudo tee /etc/yum.repos.d/vscode.repo > /dev/null
Copy
Then update the package cache and install the package using dnf (Fedora 22 and above):

dnf check-update
sudo dnf install code # or code-insiders
Copy
Or on older versions using yum:

yum check-update
sudo yum install code # or code-insiders
Copy
Due to the manual signing process and the system we use to publish, the yum repo may lag behind and not get the latest version of VS Code immediately.

Snap
Visual Studio Code is officially distributed as a Snap package in the Snap Store:

Get it from the Snap Store

You can install it by running:

sudo snap install --classic code # or code-insiders
Copy
Once installed, the Snap daemon will take care of automatically updating VS Code in the background. You will get an in-product update notification whenever a new update is available.

Note: If snap isn't available in your Linux distribution, please check the following Installing snapd guide, which can help you get that set up.

Learn more about snaps from the official Snap Documentation.

openSUSE and SLE-based distributions
The yum repository above also works for openSUSE and SLE-based systems, the following script will install the key and repository:

sudo rpm --import https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc
echo -e "[code]\nname=Visual Studio Code\nbaseurl=https://packages.microsoft.com/yumrepos/vscode\nenabled=1\ntype=rpm-md\ngpgcheck=1\ngpgkey=https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc" |sudo tee /etc/zypp/repos.d/vscode.repo > /dev/null
Copy
Then update the package cache and install the package using:

sudo zypper refresh
sudo zypper install code
Copy
AUR package for Arch Linux
There is a community-maintained Arch User Repository package for VS Code.

To get more information about the installation from the AUR, please consult the following wiki entry: Install AUR Packages.

Nix package for NixOS (or any Linux distribution using Nix package manager)
There is a community maintained VS Code Nix package in the nixpkgs repository. In order to install it using Nix, set allowUnfree option to true in your config.nix and execute:

nix-env -i vscode
Copy
Installing .rpm package manually
The VS Code .rpm package (64-bit) can also be manually downloaded and installed, however, auto-updating won't work unless the repository above is installed. Once downloaded it can be installed using your package manager, for example with dnf:

sudo dnf install <file>.rpm
Copy
Note that other binaries are also available on the VS Code download page.

Updates
VS Code ships monthly and you can see when a new release is available by checking the release notes. If the VS Code repository was installed correctly, then your system package manager should handle auto-updating in the same way as other packages on the system.

Note: Updates are automatic and run in the background for the Snap package.

Node.js
Node.js is a popular platform and runtime for easily building and running JavaScript applications. It also includes npm, a Package Manager for Node.js modules. You'll see Node.js and npm mentioned frequently in our documentation and some optional VS Code tooling requires Node.js (for example, the VS Code extension generator).

If you'd like to install Node.js on Linux, see Installing Node.js via package manager to find the Node.js package and installation instructions tailored to your Linux distribution. You can also install and support multiple versions of Node.js by using the Node Version Manager.

To learn more about JavaScript and Node.js, see our Node.js tutorial, where you'll learn about running and debugging Node.js applications with VS Code.

Setting VS Code as the default text editor
xdg-open
You can set the default text editor for text files (text/plain) that is used by xdg-open with the following command:

xdg-mime default code.desktop text/plain
Copy
Debian alternatives system
Debian-based distributions allow setting a default editor using the Debian alternatives system, without concern for the MIME type. You can set this by running the following and selecting code:

sudo update-alternatives --set editor /usr/bin/code
Copy
If Visual Studio Code doesn't show up as an alternative to editor, you need to register it:

sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/editor editor $(which code) 10
Copy
Windows as a Linux developer machine
Another option for Linux development with VS Code is to use a Windows machine with the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).

Windows Subsystem for Linux
With WSL, you can install and run Linux distributions on Windows. This enables you to develop and test your source code on Linux while still working locally on a Windows machine. WSL supports Linux distributions such as Ubuntu, Debian, SUSE, and Alpine available from the Microsoft Store.

When coupled with the WSL extension, you get full VS Code editing and debugging support while running in the context of a Linux distro on WSL.

See the Developing in WSL documentation to learn more or try the Working in WSL introductory tutorial.

Next steps
Once you have installed VS Code, these topics will help you learn more about it:

Additional Components - Learn how to install Git, Node.js, TypeScript, and tools like Yeoman.
User Interface - A quick orientation to VS Code.
User/Workspace Settings - Learn how to configure VS Code to your preferences through settings.
Common questions
Azure VM Issues
I'm getting a "Running without the SUID sandbox" error?

You can safely ignore this error.

Debian and moving files to trash
If you see an error when deleting files from the VS Code Explorer on the Debian operating system, it might be because the trash implementation that VS Code is using is not there.

Run these commands to solve this issue:

sudo apt-get install gvfs libglib2.0-bin
Copy
Conflicts with VS Code packages from other repositories
Some distributions, for example Pop!_OS provide their own code package. To ensure the official VS Code repository is used, create a file named /etc/apt/preferences.d/code with the following content:

Package: code
Pin: origin "packages.microsoft.com"
Pin-Priority: 9999
Copy
"Visual Studio Code is unable to watch for file changes in this large workspace" (error ENOSPC)
When you see this notification, it indicates that the VS Code file watcher is running out of file handles that are needed to implement file watching. Most often this can happen when opening a workspace that is large and contains many files. Before adjusting platform limits, make sure that potentially large folders, such as Python .venv, are added to the files.watcherExclude setting (more details below). It is also possible that other running applications consume so many file handles that none are left for VS Code to use. In that case it might help to close these other applications.

The current limit can be viewed by running:

cat /proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_watches
Copy
The limit can be increased to its maximum by editing /etc/sysctl.conf (except on Arch Linux, read below) and adding this line to the end of the file:

fs.inotify.max_user_watches=524288
Copy
The new value can then be loaded in by running sudo sysctl -p.

While 524,288 is the maximum number of files that can be watched, if you're in an environment that is particularly memory constrained, you may want to lower the number. Each file watch takes up 1080 bytes, so assuming that all 524,288 watches are consumed, that results in an upper bound of around 540 MiB.

Arch-based distros (including Manjaro) require you to change a different file; follow these steps instead.

Another option is to exclude specific workspace directories from the VS Code file watcher with the files.watcherExclude setting. The default for files.watcherExclude excludes node_modules and some folders under .git, but you can add other directories that you don't want VS Code to track.

"files.watcherExclude": {
    "**/.git/objects/**": true,
    "**/.git/subtree-cache/**": true,
    "**/node_modules/*/**": true
  }
Copy
I can't see Chinese characters in Ubuntu
We're working on a fix. In the meantime, open the application menu, then choose File > Preferences > Settings. In the Text Editor > Font section, set "Font Family" to Droid Sans Mono, Droid Sans Fallback. If you'd rather edit the settings.json file directly, set editor.fontFamily as shown:

    "editor.fontFamily": "Droid Sans Mono, Droid Sans Fallback"
Copy
Package git is not installed
This error can appear during installation and is typically caused by the package manager's lists being out of date. Try updating them and installing again:

# For .deb
sudo apt-get update

# For .rpm (Fedora 21 and below)
sudo yum check-update

# For .rpm (Fedora 22 and above)
sudo dnf check-update
Copy
The code bin command does not bring the window to the foreground on Ubuntu
Running code . on Ubuntu when VS Code is already open in the current directory will not bring VS Code into the foreground. This is a feature of the OS which can be disabled using ccsm.

# Install
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install compizconfig-settings-manager

# Run
ccsm
Copy
Under General > General Options > Focus & Raise Behaviour, set "Focus Prevention Level" to "Off". Remember this is an OS-level setting that will apply to all applications, not just VS Code.

Cannot install .deb package due to "/etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list: No such file or directory"
This can happen when sources.list.d doesn't exist or you don't have access to create the file. To fix this, try manually creating the folder and an empty vscode.list file:

sudo mkdir /etc/apt/sources.list.d
sudo touch /etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list
Copy
Cannot move or resize the window while X forwarding a remote window
If you are using X forwarding to use VS Code remotely, you will need to use the native title bar to ensure you can properly manipulate the window. You can switch to using it by setting window.titleBarStyle to native.

Using the custom title bar
The custom title bar and menus were enabled by default on Linux for several months. The custom title bar has been a success on Windows, but the customer response on Linux suggests otherwise. Based on feedback, we have decided to make this setting opt-in on Linux and leave the native title bar as the default.

The custom title bar provides many benefits including great theming support and better accessibility through keyboard navigation and screen readers. Unfortunately, these benefits do not translate as well to the Linux platform. Linux has a variety of desktop environments and window managers that can make the VS Code theming look foreign to users. For users needing the accessibility improvements, we recommend enabling the custom title bar when running in accessibility mode using a screen reader. You can still manually set the title bar with the Window: Title Bar Style (window.titleBarStyle) setting.

Broken cursor in editor with display scaling enabled
Due to an upstream issue #14787 with Electron, the mouse cursor may render incorrectly with scaling enabled. If you notice that the usual text cursor is not being rendered inside the editor as you would expect, try falling back to the native menu bar by configuring the setting window.titleBarStyle to native.

Repository changed its origin value
If you receive an error similar to the following:

E: Repository '...' changed its 'Origin' value from '...' to '...'
N: This must be accepted explicitly before updates for this repository can be applied. See apt-secure(8) manpage for details.
Copy
Use apt instead of apt-get and you will be prompted to accept the origin change:

sudo apt update
Copy

